TODO.md, before:

- [ ] README custom similarity strategy
- [ ] README Algorithm  and Diagrams
- [ ] Review README against recent API changes
- [ ] allow custom Mahalanobis distances with PSD matrix
- [ ] shorten `association_column_names`
- [X] Literals for similaritylike and strategylike
- [X] Rename ABC to SimilarityStrategy
- [X] Return similarity matrix along with dataframe?
- [ ] Other Embedding Models
    - [X] implemented local nomic
    - [ ] Ollama embedding models
- [ ] use uv to walk back to older package versions
- [ ] 100% code coverage?
- [ ] beta release

Backlog
-------

- [ ] join option for blocking?
- [ ] unit tests for plots?
- [ ] Dedupe / clustering?
- [ ] biclustering approach?
- [ ] support polars?
- [ ] CLI tool

Done
----

- [X] support named strategies
- [X] enforce / validate types
- [X] suffix options, similar to pd.merge()
- [X] column name options
- [X] flag private methods
- [X] Use | for Union types

- [X] static type annotations
- [X] README better examples
- [X] embed: to truncate long content
- [X] batch embed calls if too many
- [X] test batching
- [X] retry with exponential backoff?
- [X] refactor to separate files?
- [X] unit tests edge cases (empty lists, etc.)
- [x] PyPI badges
- [X] Black (now Ruff)
- [X] github test badge
- [X] loggings and warnings
- [X] cache openai client in automatic mode

Commit message:

better options, validation, tests. 100% coverage except for plots.

TODO.md, after:

- [ ] README custom similarity strategy
- [ ] README Algorithm  and Diagrams
- [ ] Review README against recent API changes
- [ ] allow custom Mahalanobis distances with PSD matrix
- [X] shorten `association_column_names`
- [X] Literals for similaritylike and strategylike
- [X] Rename ABC to SimilarityStrategy
- [X] Return similarity matrix along with dataframe?
- [ ] Other Embedding Models
    - [X] implemented local nomic
    - [ ] Ollama embedding models
- [ ] use uv to walk back to older package versions
- [ ] 100% code coverage?
- [ ] beta release

Backlog
-------

- [ ] join option for blocking?
- [ ] unit tests for plots?
- [ ] Dedupe / clustering?
- [ ] biclustering approach?
- [ ] support polars?
- [ ] CLI tool
- [ ] Code coverage report not working in Github Actions?

Done
----

- [X] support named strategies
- [X] enforce / validate types
- [X] suffix options, similar to pd.merge()
- [X] column name options
- [X] flag private methods
- [X] Use | for Union types

- [X] static type annotations
- [X] README better examples
- [X] embed: to truncate long content
- [X] batch embed calls if too many
- [X] test batching
- [X] retry with exponential backoff?
- [X] refactor to separate files?
- [X] unit tests edge cases (empty lists, etc.)
- [x] PyPI badges
- [X] Black (now Ruff)
- [X] github test badge
- [X] loggings and warnings
- [X] cache openai client in automatic mode
